doc: add trouble shooting for backing image unavailable issue (#1072)
longhorn/website: content/kb/troubleshooting-resolving-backing-image-unavailability-issue.md

## Workaround
If no healthy backing image file exists, the only way to restore it is to trigger a re-download. Follow these steps:
1. Detach all the volumes using the backing image. There is no risk of data loss since the volume does not need to be deleted.
2. Edit the backing image CR:
   ```sh
   kubectl edit lhbi/${BACKINGIMAGENAME} -n longhorn-system
   ```
   Remove all `disks` or `diskFileSpecMap` entries by replacing the value with an empty map (`{}`).
3. Delete the backing image data source CR:
   ```sh
   kubectl delete lhbids -n longhorn-system
   ```
   Longhorn will then re-download the backing image file to a disk, making it ready and healthy again. The file will subsequently be synced to other disks as needed.

> 4. You can try attach the volumes using the backing images again.

Reviewer: Should we mention that re-download only works for BI with the `download` type?

Author: sure that is quite important
Thanks

Reviewer: If the corrupted BI is `upload` or `export`, IIUC, the only workaround is re-creating the BI, right?

Author: Added, thanks

---
title: "Troubleshooting: Resolving Backing Image Unavailability Issue"
authors:
- "Jack Lin"
draft: false
date: 2025-03-14
versions:
- "all"
categories:
- "longhorn manager"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Symptoms
When the backing image is unavailable in a Longhorn cluster, the following issues occur:
- The volume using the backing image cannot be attached.

> - The replica using the backing image cannot start.

Author: fixed.

## Root Cause
The root cause of this issue is that there is no available copy of the backing image in the cluster. This can be verified by checking the backing image Custom Resource (CR) in Kubernetes. The backing image CR contains:
- `disks` (before v1.7.0) or `diskFileSpecMap` (after v1.7.0) in the spec, indicating which disks should store the backing image file.
- `diskFileStatusMap` in the status, showing the state of the backing image file on each disk.

> You can check the disk status in the Longhorn node CR using:

Author: fixed.

```sh
kubectl get nodes.longhorn.io -n longhorn-system -oyaml
```
Each disk in the cluster has a Backing Image Manager CR and a corresponding pod that monitors and manages all backing image files on that disk.

> If a backing image file is missing or corrupted (e.g., checksum mismatch), its status in `diskFileStatusMap` will be marked as failed. Longhorn attempts to recover by syncing the file from a healthy copy on another disk. However, if all copies are missing or corrupted, Longhorn will have no available file to recover from, making the backing image unavailable. Additionally, if the disk or node storing a backing image is unavailable, its file status will be unknown until the disk or node is back online. If the disk or node never comes back, the file remains in an unknown state forever.

Reviewer 2: I suggest using a table here for easier scanning.

> ## Workaround
> If no healthy backing image file exists, the only way to restore it is to trigger a re-download. There is no risk of data loss since the volume does not need to be deleted. Follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Workaround

You must download the file again if no healthy copy of the backing image file exists. Data loss is unlikely because the volume is not deleted.

**Important**: This workaround takes effect only when the source type of the backing image is `download`.

```

Reviewer 2: I moved the note here because users must read it before starting the workaround.

Author: thanks

> 1. Edit the backing image CR:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Edit the backing image CR.
```

Author: fixed.

   ```sh
   kubectl edit lhbi/${BACKINGIMAGENAME} -n longhorn-system
   ```
   Remove all `disks` or `diskFileSpecMap` entries by replacing the value with an empty map (`{}`).

> 2. Delete the backing image data source CR:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Delete the backing image data source CR.
```

Author: fixed.

   ```sh
   kubectl delete lhbids -n longhorn-system
   ```

>    Longhorn will then re-download the backing image file to a disk, making it ready and healthy again. The file will subsequently be synced to other disks as needed.
> 3. You can try attach the volumes using the backing images again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Longhorn downloads the backing image file to a disk. The file is marked ready and healthy, and is subsequently synced to other disks as necessary.

1. Attach the volumes that use the downloaded backing image.
```

> **Notice**: This workaround only works when the source type of the backing image is `download`.

Reviewer 2: I relocated the note. Please remove this paragraph.

Author: fixed.

> ## How to Prevent Backing Image Loss
> ### Before v1.7.0
> Before Longhorn v1.7.0, there was no automatic eviction mechanism for backing images when cordoning and draining a node for upgrades. To prevent loss:
> - Retrieve the available disks and their UUIDs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prevent Backing Image Loss

### Versions Earlier than v1.7.0

Longhorn versions earlier than v1.7.0 do not have an automatic eviction mechanism for backing images whenever a node is cordoned and drained for upgrades.

1. Retrieve the UUIDs of the available disks.
```

Reviewer 2: The actions seem to be sequential so I changed this to a numbered list.

  ```sh
  kubectl get nodes.longhorn.io -n longhorn-system -oyaml
  ```

> - Manually add the disk UUIDs of another node to the `disks` field in the backing image CR:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Add the disk UUIDs of another node to the `disks` field in the backing image CR.
```

Author: fixed.

  ```sh
  kubectl edit lhbi/${BACKINGIMAGENAME} -n longhorn-system
  ```

> - When the backing image file is ready in other disks, then you can clean up backing image file from the draining node by manually deleting the disk UUIDs of the node in the `disks` field in the backing image CR before removing the node:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Once copies of the backing image file are available in other disks, remove the file from the node that is being drained. To do this, delete the disk UUIDs of the node in the `disks` field of the backing image CR.
```

Reviewer 2: The draft combines two actions in one step so I separated them.

Author: fixed.

  ```sh
  kubectl edit lhbi/${BACKINGIMAGENAME} -n longhorn-system
  ```

> - If the backing image is actively used by replicas, evicting the replicas to another disk or node will also sync the backing image file to the new location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Remove the node.

1. If the backing image is actively used by replicas, evict the replicas to another disk or node. Doing this syncs the backing image file to the new location.
```

Author: fixed.

> ### After v1.7.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### v1.7.0 and Later Versions
```

Author: fixed.
